Access Control List (ACL) Concepts and Configuration
- how acls filter traffic, use wildcard masks, creation, placement/implementation

ipv4 acls
- configure ipv4 acls, use a sequence of numbers to edit existing acls


ACL
- a table that tells a computer operating system which access rights each user has a particulary system object (file directory, indiv. File)
- each object has a security attribute that identifies its acl
- a router does not have an acl by default, so by default, a router does not filter traffic
- in networks, its a table that filters traffic going in and out of the network

what can be controlled:
telnet/ssh
web access
pinging
traffic

purpose of ACL: packet filtering
- controls the access to a network by analyzing the incoming and outgoing packets and passing/dropping them based on given criteria (source IP, dest. IP, and the protocol carried in the packet)
- a router acts as a packet filter when it forwards/denies packets according to filter rules
- and ACL in this case is a sequential list of permit/deny statements, known as access control entries
- not just set by the admin, can be set by entities/authority figures (deans, chairs, etc.)
- creating & implementation are different tasks

access control entries (ACEs) – a sequential list/table of permit/deny statements

access list direction – access lists are applied on the interface of the router and have a direction
inbound access list – check traffic that is coming into the interface. Filters the packets coming into a specific interface before they are routed to the outbound interface
outbound access list – check traffic that is going out of the interface. Filters packets after being routed, regardless of the inbound interface

Wildcard Masks in ACLs
how to compute: take the mask 255.255.255.255 and subtract the subnet mask from it, then you have the wildcard mask

 the zeros in the octets of the wildcard mask are the octets/bits where the rule applies.
The ones are the bits taht can be ignored

when combining the ip address to be processed and the wildcard mask to be processed, the resulting ip address [range] is to be blocked

default static route uses the mask 0.0.0.0, whose wildcard mask is 255.255.255.255. if we reverse the roles, 0.0.0.0 allows for any IP with any subnet mask

wildcard mask 0.0.0.0 – counts the number of ip addresses in the network
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 – identifies any network with any subnet mask

for a specific host/ip address to have rules applied, use 0.0.0.0 wildcard mask
to apply a rule to all host/ip addresses, use 255.255.255.255 wildcard mask

right to left – least ordered to highest order bit

192.168.10.0/27
first 3 subnets to be blocked

0.0.0.0 – host

host 192.168.10.100 
is the same as
192.168.10.100 0.0.0.0

0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255
is the same as
any

acls should be placed where it has the greatest impact on the efficiency
standard acl – closer to the destination. Specify as close to the destination as possible
extended acl – closer/nearer to the source. Locate extended acls as close as possible to the source

placement and type of ACL used may depend on:
- the extent of the admin’s control
- bandwidth of networks involved
- ease of configuration

types of access lists
standard – looks at source ip address. Number 1-99. very generalized
extended – looks at source and dest IP, source and dest port, source and dest protocol. More details, granular. Number 100-199. harder to setup, but a lot more refined & harder to screw up

Port Number and Port Names

port 21 - ftp
port 80 – http
port 443 – https
port 25 – email


- port number is the logical addres of each application/process that uses a network or the internet to communicate. It uniquely identifies a network-based application on a computer
- each applicatoin/program is allocated a 16-bit integer port number
- this number is assigned automatically by the OS,manually by the user, or is set as default for some popular applications

- normally, you’d need an ip address for each task, but needing one can only allow one app at the time, hence the concept of ports. Ip address + port = multitasking
- implicitly: denies all other people/protocols

deny all
allow yap

allow yap
deny all

http is under tcp
ping? Ftp? ssh

what is better? Permit FIRST! Then deny, since deny is already implicit

